Long before modern horror learned how to
inhabit dreams, Alfred Kubin was already
there, filling paper with hybrid
creatures, suffocating interiors,
devouring animals and human beings
caught in worlds that felt less imagined
than infected.
His drawings do not simply show fear.
They show a mind trying to give fear a
body.
When it comes to unsettling imagery,
it's something that I'm always drawn to
on this channel, but it also got me
thinking when researching Alfred Kubin
for this video about the things. If much
of modern horror that we're familiar
with is built on shock, Alfred Kubin
worked differently.
He understood something more intimate
and more difficult to name, that the
deepest forms of fear do not always
arrive as sudden voice or a sudden
scream, but as atmosphere and
distortion.
A room that feels wrong, a body that
feels half human and half symbol.
A landscape that behaves less like
nature than a trap set by the
unconscious.
In this video, I want to look at Kubin
not just as another dark artist, but as
one of the great early cartographers of
psychic dread, an artist that drew the
subconscious before the modern visual
language of horror had fully formed
around it.
We'll look at several of his key works,
more specifically his illustrations,
from plague visions and predatory
creatures to images of fate, [music]
pursuit, and self-confrontation.
And ask what exactly Kubin was seeing in
the human condition that still feels so
uncomfortably alive today.
I should also say, as I always try to do
on this channel, that some of the
readings draw on museum descriptions and
biographical material, while others are
more openly personal interpretations of
mine. And uh Kubin is not an artist who
always explains himself very clearly.
And that ambiguity is part of what makes
him so compelling.
So, if you see something different to me
in these images, do share it in the
comments. You know, with an artist like
this, multiple readings can only deepen
the experience, right? So, it'd be great
to hear what you think, [music] not just
hearing what I've got to say.
With that said, welcome to another
video, my friends. Today, we'll be
delving into the shadowy world of Alfred
Kubin.
Alfred Kubin was born on the 10th of
April in 1877 in Leitmeritz, Bohemia,
then part of Austria-Hungary, now known
as Litoměřice in the Czech Republic.
His childhood was marked by instability,
>> [music]
>> grief, and an unusual closeness to
death. The loss of his mother left a
lasting wound, and later accounts of his
life repeatedly connect that trauma to
the morbid imagination that would come
to define his art.
As a young man, he apprenticed with a
photographer, struggled with depression
and severe anxiety, and in 1896, he
attempted to take his own life at his
mother's grave.
A decisive turn came in 1898 when Kubin
moved to Munich to study art.
There, he encountered artists whose
influence would be crucial to him,
especially the likes of Odilon Redon,
James Ensor, [music] and Max Klinger.
From them, he absorbed a taste for the
dreamlike, for grotesque, the symbolic,
and the psychologically charged. But,
Kubin was never just imitating those
influences. Very quickly, he began
pushing forward something even more
claustrophobic and inward, drawings that
feel lit from inside a nightmare, rather
than from the visible world.
By the early 1900s, he'd begun
attracting serious attention.
His work was exhibited in Berlin in
1902, and the publication of a Weber
portfolio in 1903 helped establish his
reputation.
By this time, many of the themes that
would define him were already in place.
Plague, pursuit, warped bodies, uncanny
rituals, predatory animals, and death
not as a single event, but as an
atmosphere hanging over everything.
In 1904, he married Hedwig Gündler, and
a few years later settled in Zwickledt
in Upper Austria, where he would spend
the majority of the rest of his life.
He illustrated an enormous number of
books, produced a remarkable body of
drawings, and in 1909 published his only
novel, The Other Side, a suffocating
vision of dream architecture, decay, and
apocalyptic themes that feel like
literary counterparts to his images.
He later exhibited with the Blue Rider
Circle at Der Sturm, placing him at a
strange crossroads between symbolism,
expressionism, and something more
private and difficult to classify.
Kubín died in August 1959,
but the work he created still feels
unnervingly alive. Not because it simply
shows monsters, but because it shows
consciousness under pressure, the inner
weather of dread before it has fully
become language.
So, what exactly does that dread look
like on the page? Let's move into the
works themselves and find out.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll begin with The Last King, an early
drawing from around 1900 to 1903. And I
feel this one makes an ideal entry point
into Kubín's world because it introduces
one of his favorite ideas straight away,
a representation of power as something
already rotting from within.
At first glance, the image seems to
promise a royal portrait. There is a
crowned figure elevated above the crowd,
seated high enough to suggest rank,
authority, even ceremony. But the
illusion collapses almost immediately.
This king does not radiate command. He
droops. His face is gaunt and sorrowful.
One hand curls over the arm of the
throne in a cramped, almost claw-like
gesture, while his long, attenuated leg
stretches downwards with a strange
mixture of elegance and weakness.
He is still visible, still enthroned,
still crowned, but all of the things
that those symbols represent have seemed
to have drained out of him. He seems
almost emaciated, pathetic, and lonely.
Cuban strengthens that impression
through composition. The king is pushed
to one side and surrounded by a broad
field of pale emptiness.
In the hands of another artist, that
might create grandeur,
but here it creates abandonment.
The empty space does not glorify him. It
isolates him.
He seems more stranded than enthroned,
almost like he's marooned inside the
shell of his own authority.
Then there is a crowd below, a dark,
jagged band of pointed forms that only
gradually register as people.
They resemble hoods, but also stones,
teeth, or some black organic growth.
Cuban often blurs the line between the
human collective and something more
anonymous, and that ambiguity is worth
honing in on.
These are not loving subjects gathered
beneath their ruler. They feel more like
a mute mass of witness, [music]
accusation, or silent judgment.
Even the crown itself seems unstable. It
does not look richly jeweled or
materially weighty, it feels brittle,
almost makeshift, closer to a paper
emblem than a durable symbol of
sovereignty.
And that is something very typical of
Kubin. The symbol remains in place, but
its confidence is stripped away.
For me, the drawing becomes less about
monarchy in any narrow political sense
than about the afterlife of authority
itself. It's like it represents what
happens when the outer signs of power
remain, but the force behind them has
already withered away.
Kubin does not show us a dramatic
overthrow of a ruler here. He shows us
something more subtle and unsettling. A
ruler who is already finished, but still
on display, while a gloom [music]
gathers below.
If The Last King gave us authority in
decline, Epidemic expands the scale of
Kubin's fear outwards. Here, the threat
is no longer seated on a throne. It is
hanging over the world.
Here, we can see a gigantic skeletal
figure crouching over a small winter
village, scattering darkness over the
rooftops below.
From one of my sources, the Albertina
has described it as a huge skeleton
sowing the seeds of an epidemic across
the village. And that word sowing is
exactly what makes the image so
disturbing.
This is not plague as an accident or an
outbreak. It is plague as cultivation.
Disease becomes a kind of anti-harvest.
Kubin gives the figure a scale that
belongs entirely to a nightmare. It's
too large, too impossible, too absurd in
the precise way that dreams are absurd.
And yet, it feels completely convincing
within the world of the drawing.
One hand seems to release a dark
substance out of the settlements. The
body itself is not simply skeletal
either.
It feels spider-like, insectoids,
scavenging, as though Kubin has fused
human remains with verminous life.
The winter setting [music] intensifies
everything.
The village sits in an open snow beneath
a dead and sky with low rooftops, bare
trees, and almost no visible human
activity.
This is not a scene of panic, it's a
scene of sentence. The snow flattens the
landscape into something pale and mute,
while the darkness falling from the
giant's hand reads like contamination
made visible.
What I find so effective here is the way
that Kubin refuses to localize the
catastrophe.
>> [music]
>> The village still looks ordinary. The
houses remain houses, the trees remain
trees, and yet the whole place has been
physically altered. The giant does not
seem to obey the same rules of space as
the settlement beneath it. It appears at
once inside the landscape and imposed
upon it like a hallucination crossing
into reality.
That's exactly why the image feels
larger than illness alone. It could be
read as plague, certainly, but also as
war, panic, ideology, despair, any force
that descends into ordinary life from a
scale too vast to comprehend.
In that sense, Epidemic is not only
about disease, it's also about the
fragility of the human world beneath
what it cannot control.
>> [music]
>> So, where Epidemic shows ruin coming
from above, Into the Unknown imagines
people moving toward it under their own
power.
The The is brutally simple. In the
distance, a huge dark opening gapes like
a mouth. Toward it [music] streams a
dense procession of human figures.
The closest to us still register as
individuals, but as they move further
into the image, the more they merge into
a single current.
The Leopold Museum notes that the
figures nearest the viewer seem to show
no obvious fear or suspicion. And that
detail changes quite a few things. These
people are not running into terror. They
are proceeding. They're willingly
[music] participating.
Kubín turns the unknown into a
destination with the shape of a mouth,
part cave, part creature, part void. And
then it fills the foregrounds with
people moving toward it as though this
were simply the path laid before them.
The image becomes less about panic and
more about submission or habit or
collective surrender.
Visually, the crowd forms a pale river
flowing into darkness, and that makes
the scene feel less like a single
episode and more like a process. The
opening on the horizon does not read as
some sudden rupture in the world. It
feels very much built into the world's
structure as though the rows of human
movement has always led here.
There is also a bleak irony in the
title. Into the unknown sounds almost
adventurous, [music] even romantic, the
phrase of a traveler, a pilgrim, or an
explorer.
The Kubín twists that promise into
something a bit more fatal. This is not
discovery. It seems more like a
disappearance.
What I like most about this drawing is
how universal it is. There are no
specific landmarks, no explicit history,
no side narrative to anchor the image
into one clear interpretation.
Because of that, it can stand for
mortality, mass conformity, blind
progress, spiritual emptiness, the
unconscious, or the simple human fact of
moving towards the final destination
that is waiting for all of us, yet one
that we cannot fully understand.
Kubín does not force that simple shut on
us. He actually leaves it open, and that
openness is part of what makes the image
linger.
With this next piece titled Government,
Kubín becomes almost savagely literal.
Instead of showing power through a ruler
over a crowd, he gives it a machine.
The image presents a hulking wheeled
structure, part fortress, part vehicle,
part monstrous piece of public
architecture.
It lumbers across an open landscape on
giant rollers with tiny human figures
perched on balconies and platforms
above.
The disproportion is immediate and
absurd. Those people are so small that
they feel less like citizens and more
like accessories attached to an
apparatus far larger than themselves.
And that kind of leads us to the
drawing's central joke and its central
threat. Kubín takes the abstract idea of
government and gives it a body, but this
body is clumsy, overbuilt, mechanical,
and faintly ridiculous. There's nothing
graceful about it. The state here is not
wisdom, order, or protection. It's this
bulky, cumbersome mass.
The wheels that we can see are, of
course, pretty important because they
imply movement, but this is not the
movement of something agile or
life-giving. It's a movement of
something that advances by sheer weight.
The blade at the front sharpens the
symbolism even further. Government in
Kubin's vision does not simply glide or
administer. It clears, flattens, and
pushes through. Whatever complexity
stands in its way is treated as an
obstruction.
I also like the surrounding emptiness.
The landscape is sparse and indifferent,
which makes the structure look even
stranger, like an artificial organism
dropped into the world from another
logic entirely. It does not arise
naturally from the terrain around it. In
fact, it looks as if it's imposing
itself upon it.
Compared with the earlier works,
Government feels more openly satirical,
but the satire does not make it lighter.
If anything, it makes it more
disturbing.
Kubin understands that absurdity and
menace often strengthen one another.
This machine is almost laughable in its
exaggeration, yet exactly because it is
so bloated, so armored, and so detached
from human scale, it becomes an object
that's ominous and almost invincible.
If Government turns political order into
machinery, The Egg turns creation into
something suspect.
At the center stands a bizarre figure
that seems part woman, part skeleton,
part sacred object.
The limbs are thin and fragile. The
ribcage is visible, and the head is
small and eerily composed. And yet, the
torso swells outwards into a huge
glowing oval, like a luminous belly or a
monumental egg.
The image invokes pregnancy, birth,
origin, and fertility, but strips those
ideas of any reassurance.
What should feel generative feels
contaminated. Kubin takes one of the
oldest symbols of life and makes it
unstable.
The figure hovers between mother and
corpse, apparition and idol, and body
and emblem. You do not really feel that
something healthy is about to emerge.
You feel that something uncanny is
trying to come into being.
The radiating lines around the form
deepen that effect. They lend the figure
the air of revelation, almost of
sanctity, but Kuban twists that visual
language into something more blasphemous
and holy.
This is not a comforting nativity. It
feels closer to a corrupted
annunciation.
Then there's a dark rectangular pit in
the foreground, which pulls the image
towards burial, excavation, or the open
grave. That detail crucially binds
generation to mortality. Creation and
burial stand in the same frame, only a
few steps apart.
Whatever is being born here is already
shadowed by the earth and the promise of
death.
The scene is made even stranger by the
shadowy form in the background, which
could be a statue, a witness, or an
idol, or something another unreadable
participant in Kuban's symbolic theater.
Its vagueness helps the drawing feel
less like an illustration of an event
and more like a fragment of some obscure
right.
What makes the egg especially memorable
to me is its stillness. The figure does
not look like it's about to attack or
pounce on anyone. It simply stands there
and lets the wrongness accumulate.
Many other illustrations by Kuban show
that stillness can be more oppressive
than action, but here he uses it in
service of something slightly different,
not catastrophe descending, but unease
gathering around the idea of origin
itself.
>> [music]
>> By the time we reach Das Meer as in
Kubin has stripped his imagery down even
further. This is horror reduced [music]
to emblem.
A giant skull rises from the water. Set
into it is a single huge eye. In the
foreground, a small black boat drifts
towards the apparition.
That is nearly all the drawing gives us
and that is enough as far as I'm
concerned.
What makes the image so effective is the
fusion at its center. A skull already
signifies death, but the great eye
changes the meaning completely.
Death here is not empty. It is aware. It
sees. It watches the approach. Kubin
turns mortality into a form of
attention.
That small boat is just as [music]
important. Its size and the two small
mariners on deck creates scale, but it
also establishes the emotional logic of
the scene.
A boat usually suggests passage, travel,
safe crossing, but here it becomes a
vessel moving towards an encounter it
cannot possibly master.
There is something mythic in this setup,
but Kubin strips away all romance. No
ferryman, no guide, no promised
destination, only the steady movement of
a self toward a terrible recognition.
What I like most about this image is its
inevitability. Even with the waves
behind it, the drawing does not feel
explosive. It feels suspended, like the
boat drifts and the skull looms and the
eye remains fixed. Kubin captures the
moment just before dread fully becomes
knowledge.
You can almost read the image more
literally through the terrors of the
sea. The wave, the skull, the boat's
broken mast, the giant watchful form as
a personification of the mariner's fear
that the sea is not merely dangerous,
but alive with intention.
Either way, the drawing keeps circling
the same idea. Death not as blankness,
but as a force that notices you.
>> [music]
[music]
>> If Das Karassin presents dread as an
emblem, then the serpent god gives it
the shape of a deity.
The figure is an extraordinary fusion,
human torso, serpent body, gaunt face,
uplifted arms, slithering along what
looks like a lofty cavernous cliff edge.
It seems to emerge from or be framed by
a monumental vessel or altar, as though
it's been contained, revealed, or
worshipped all at once.
The image feels almost ceremonial, but
whatever ceremony is taking place here
offers no comfort.
Serpents are already unstable symbols,
wisdom, danger, temptation,
transformation, and renewal. And Cuban
seems to gather all of his meanings
together, only to turn them cold.
This does not feel like a beneficent god
appearing to guide anyone. It feels like
an underworld force dragging itself into
visibility.
The human features make the creature
worse. Cuban knows that total
monstrosity can become abstract, but the
face here is recognizably human enough
to feel intimate, but wrong enough to
feel estranged. That halfway point
between familiarity and otherness is
where so much of his imagery does the
work.
I'm especially drawn to the posture. The
raised arms carry the echo of blessing,
invocation, perhaps even crucifixion
imagery. But Cuban twists those
associations away from [music]
redemption and towards something more
archaic, indifference, and ritualistic.
The result is a kind of anti-revelation.
We are shown a god, but not one that we
would want to worship.
And whilst we're on that topic, [music]
what makes the drawing stand apart from
some of the others is this atmosphere of
worship without trust. The image feels
sacred in structure, [music] yet hostile
in spirit. Kuban takes that human urge
to imagine higher powers [music] and
gives us a divinity that seems ancient,
theatrical, and faintly malicious.
>> [music]
>> After so many works built around crowds,
apparitions, and symbolic space, Head
with Cut-Off Nose feels brutally
intimate.
Kuban abandons wider theater and forces
us into direct confrontation with a
face.
The image is stripped nearly bare. Out
of darkness emerges a mutilated head,
ghostly and frontal.
There is no surrounding narrative, no
elaborate setting, no allegorical
machinery to mediate what we're seeing.
The face itself has to carry the full
weight of the work.
Of course, even without the title, the
missing nose is one of the first things
the eye notices.
But the real power lies in how the
absence destabilizes the whole head. The
half-closed eyes, the long twisted neck,
pale skin, elongated skull, and dark
cavity at the center of the face make
the figure appear less like a portrait
than a presence already halfway erased.
Kuban shows us not the act of violence,
but its residue. The wound has become
[music] the subject. The mutilation is
no longer event, but condition.
That gives the drawing a different kind
of horror from the earlier works that we
looked at.
>> [music]
>> It is quieter, closer, almost
humiliating.
The face is not screaming, it simply
exists before us in its damage. [music]
The missing nose also carries symbolic
force because it occupies the center of
the face. Remove it and the familiarity
collapses.
Human remains human, but only barely.
Kuban demonstrates how little has to be
altered before a face begins to slip
into abjection, ghostliness, even social
exile.
The way the head emerges from dark wash
and shadow reinforces that feeling. It
seems less drawn into the scene than
stained into view, as though it has
seeped up from the paper itself. Earlier
works externalized dread into kings,
machines, crowds, and monsters, but here
Kuban brings it inwards. The nightmare
is written directly onto the human
subject. [music]
>> [music]
>> With black mass, here the fear does not
come from a giant or a deity or a
mutilated face. This time, [music] it
comes from a gathering.
The scene is stark. We're presented with
a tight ring of monk-like figures
dressed in black standing or marching
towards the viewer in a huddle.
Their skull-like faces only faintly
visible.
Apart from what look like ceremonial
swords that the figures are holding,
there is almost nothing else. No
dramatic action, no explicit object of
worship, no obvious climax. Yet, the
image feels deeply contaminated.
The title does much of the work. A black
mass implies inversion, ritual turned
corrupt, the sacred hollowed out and
performed in reverse.
Kubín does not need to illustrate that
concept literally. The atmosphere of a
drawing does it for him.
The figures stand with a stillness of
devotion, but there's no warmth, no
transcendence, no grace in the
arrangement. The whole scene feels
sealed, hidden, and morally callous.
What interests me most is the repetition
of the bodies. Individuality almost
disappears. The figures stop reading as
distinct persons and begin to function
as a formation.
That creates a different mode of fear
from many of the earlier works. The
danger is no longer singular, it's a
collective.
>> [snorts]
>> The gathering sharpens that effect. A
gathering can symbolize unity,
continuity, and wholeness, and
protection, but Kubín turns all of that
inwards until it becomes claustrophobic.
The group seems closed off from the
outside world as if the act of gathering
has produced its own private reality.
That is what gives Black Mass its modern
edge for me. Beneath the occult
suggestion, the image could also spark
to group obedience, ideological
enclosure, or the way that people
disappear into ritual roles until they
no longer seem fully themselves.
Kubín does not need to show us what that
group believes. The structure of the
gathering is more than enough.
>> [music]
>> The final work I'd like us to look at
today is House Hermelín Day, and it is
perhaps one of the quietest of his
works, and for that very reason, one of
the bleakest.
Gone are the gigantic apparitions, the
monstrous hybrids, the ceremonial gods.
Instead, [music] Kubin gives us a lonely
country road, a few small dark presences
in the grass, and a tree from which
several bodies hang.
The horror here is no longer feverish or
overtly symbolic. It has settled into
the landscape.
The title sounds local, even placid, as
though it refers to a place name or a
landmark.
That contrast is part of what makes the
drawing work. The road leads gently
inwards, inviting the eye to travel into
the scene, but what waits at the end is
not arrival, a revelation, or some form
of safety. It is evidence of violence
already completed.
The tree dominates the image without
theatrical excess.
Kubin does not spotlight it like a
melodramatic emblem.
He places it as part of the terrain,
which is exactly what makes it so
chilling.
>> [music]
>> The horror is not erupting into the
landscape, it's part of the landscape
itself.
We're also given a sense of distance.
We're not given close faces, gestures,
or details of suffering. Kubin withholds
that intimacy and gives us something
colder, a place which violence has
already passed into atmosphere.
The image feels less like witnessing an
event than stepping into a zone marked
by what has happened there.
The small creatures along the road
intensify that feeling.
Whether they're animals or merely dark
presences, they make the scene feel
subtly watchful, as though the land
itself has registered the act.
What lingers for me in this illustration
[music] is the sense that Kubin no
longer needs a monster. He no longer
needs to personify dread at all. A road,
a tree, and the trace of human cruelty
pretty much complete the imagery.
The fear has become historical,
environmental, and embedded.
So, looking across these works together,
I'm not sure about you, but what stays
with me the most is that Alfred Kubin
was never simply drawing monsters. He
was drawing conditions of being,
exhaustion, contamination, surrender,
dehumanization,
ritual, dread, and the slow corrosion of
certainty.
That is why his still feels so alive to
me, even when they are fantastical,
[music]
the emotions underneath them are so
recognizably human. A fear you cannot
quite name, a place that feels quietly
wrong, a structure that crushes rather
than protects, a face that no longer
feels fully like a face, and a landscape
that remembers.
Kubin understood that horror is not
always loud. It does not always need
spectacle.
Sometimes it arrives [music]
as a symbol too intimate to ignore, or
as an atmosphere that seeps into
everything around [music] it.
His drawings do not just show nightmare
visions, they show the minds giving form
to what it cannot fully master.
And maybe that is why his work still
unsettles us now, because beneath the
kings, skeletons, processions, idols,
circles, and hanging trees, Kubin is
showing us something uncomfortably
close. That fear is not always outside
us, waiting in the dark. Sometimes it's
already there, woven into the world and
into us.
Thank you for watching this video. I
hope it's been of interest, and I hope
it's inspired you to explore more works
by Alfred Kubin.
And like I said before, my
interpretations outside of what I'm able
to confirm via museum documents and
other writings, are still just my own
interpretations.
So, if you've seen something else in
these works that I might have missed, or
if you disagree with any of my
perceptions, please let me know in the
comments. Just go easy on my
mispronunciations of names and places. I
already know I'm pretty bad at those.
Before I end the video, I'd like to take
a moment to get stuck into artist's
corner.
Here in this end of video segment, I get
to share some wonderful artwork sent in
by one of my viewers. And today's
featured artist is Charlie Allen.
Charlie is a young aspiring artist from
the UK who has autism, currently working
as a model maker in the car and film
industry.
Charlie tells me that he's been drawing
and painting since he was 4 years old,
mainly drawing cars and painting manga
panels. But after discovering my YouTube
channel, he says he's decided to pursue
a small art career alongside his current
one. And that, of course, is really
exciting for me to hear.
Charlie says he's particularly inspired
by artists like Francis Bacon, Yayoi
Kusama,
and Jean-Michel Basquiat.
With the idea of taking the dark
thoughts and feelings from oneself and
putting them onto canvas with dark,
horror-like imagery.
With his art, he loves to tap into
experiences, thoughts, and feelings from
his life and general observations.
One of the biggest things he likes to
hone in on in his artwork is his
experiences with autism and masking, and
conveying feelings from an autistic
perspective.
Along with mental health and how it
affects people.
He often likes to put a big emphasis on
the eyes in his work, since he finds eye
contact as an autistic person [music]
unbearable and hyper-intensive.
He also wanted to convey that feeling
towards the viewer, that same feeling of
being stared at, [music] letting his
paintings do the work.
What I love the most about his paintings
is his use of dark colors. [music] And
I've got to say it really amplifies the
intense facial expressions of his
figures in his work. His use of fiery
and blood reds really [music]
accentuates the feeling of being caught
in a moment of intense anxiety, like
looking at demons in the dark as they
slowly emerge into the light. It's
intense-looking work, but that's exactly
the point, and it works so well.
I think he's a real talent, and I urge
you all to go and check out more of his
work. Please look up the links you see
here on screen, or click them below in
the video description.
If you too are an artist and would like
to potentially feature in one of my
videos, simply send examples of your
work and a paragraph or two about
yourself to blinddweller@gmail.com.
That's a wrap for today then. Thank you
again for watching. See you in the next
video soon. Keep being creative, and bye
for now.